.TH DAR_SLAVE 1 "September 6th, 2014"
.UC 8
.SH NAME
dar_slave \- disk archive slave for remote access to a dar archive
.SH SYNOPSIS
dar_slave [options] [<path>/]source
.P
dar_slave -h
.P
dar_slave -V
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dar_slave
reads an archive and listens for
.B dar
orders on standard input, sending asked parts of the archive on standard output.
.PP
Source is the basename of the archive to read. By default,
.B dar_slave
uses standard input and output to communicate with a
.B dar
process, which may be running on the local host or on a remote host. It is possible to change the behavior of
.B dar_slave
to use named pipe instead of standard input and output

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP 20
-h
Displays help usage.
.TP 20
-V
Displays version information.
.TP 20
-i <filename>
reads the orders from the named file instead of standard input. In most cases the filename will be a named pipe.
.TP 20
-o <filename>
sends the data to the named file <filename> instead of standard output. In most cases the filename will be a named pipe.
.TP 20
-E <string>
string is a command to be launched between slices. See dar(1) man page (same option) for more information.
.TP 20
-Q
Do not display any message on stderr when not launched from a terminal (for example when launched from an at job or crontab). Remains that any question to the user will be assumed a 'no' answer, which most of the time will abort the program.
.TP 20
-j
when virtual memory is exhausted, as user to make room before trying to continue. By default, when memory is exhausted dar aborts.
.TP 20
-9 <num>
Defines the minimum number of digits to use for archive slice numbers. See the same option in dar man page for more details.
.SH EXIT CODES
.B dar_slaves
exists with the same codes as dar does, see dar(1) man page.

.SH SIGNALS
Any signal sent to dar_slave will abort the program immediately, there is no way to have a proper termination before the end of the process

.SH SEE ALSO
dar(1), dar_xform(1), dar_manager(1), dar_cp(1), dar_split(1)

.SH KNOWN BUGS
http://sourceforge.net/p/dar/bugs/

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
http://dar.linux.free.fr/
Denis Corbin
France
Europe
